---
id: built-in-functions-javascript
sidebar_position: 10
title: Most Useful Built-in functions JavaScript
sidebar_label: Built-in functions In JS - Part1
tags: [JavaScript,Arrays,Strings]
---

While Building Applications using Javascript, you will come across different functionality requirements. To Implement these functionalities there are some Built-In Methods that are highly useful in the Programming world. 


## 1. Array Functions.
### 1.1 ```map()```
Creates a new array with the results of calling a provided function on every element in this array.

#### Example 1
Example 1: Suppose we want to add 10 to every element in a array.
We can use the map() method to map over every element in the array to add 10 to it.
```javascript
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
const output = arr.map((num) => num += 10)
console.log(arr);                            // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
console.log(output);                        // [11, 12, 13, 14, 15] 

```
It returns a __new array with the modified elements.

**Important :** If you execute conditional statements inside the map() , It returns undefined if condition is not satisfied. For those cases ```filter()``` function is used.

### 1.2 ```filter()```
The filter() function takes an array and returns a new array with only the values that meet certain criteria. It also does not mutate the original array. It is often used to select a subset of data from an array based on certain criteria.

#### Examples:

Example 1: Returning numbers which are odd.
```javascript
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
const output = arr.filter((num) => num % 2) // filter out odd numbers
console.log(arr); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
console.log(output); // [1, 3, 5]
```
Example 2: Searching in an array.
```javascript
const fruits = ["apple", "banana", "grapes", "mango", "orange"];

/**
 * Filter array items based on search criteria (query)
 */
function filterItems(arr, query) {
  return arr.filter((el) => el.toLowerCase().includes(query.toLowerCase()));
}

console.log(filterItems(fruits, "ap")); // ['apple', 'grapes']
console.log(filterItems(fruits, "an")); // ['banana', 'mango', 'orange']
```

### 1.3 ```join()```
The JavaScript Array join() method is used to concatenate the array elements with a specified separator and returns the result as a ```string```.

1. If no separator is specified, the array elements will be separated by (,) comma by default.
2. This method does not change the original array instead, it returns a new string as a result.
3. If the array has only one item, then the value will be returned without a separator.

```javascript
array.join(separator); // returns a string 
```
#### Example:
```javascript

const animals = ["Lion", "Chetaah", "Tiger", "Elephant", "Dinosaur"];
let result = animals.join(" and "); 
console.log(result); //Lion and Chetaah and Tiger and Elephant and Dinosaur
 
```

### 1.4 ```reduce()```
The Array.reduce() method is used to manipulate array. This method executes a reducer function on each element of the array (from left to right) and returns a 'single value' as a result.

This method does not execute the reducer function for empty array elements. In addition to that, it does not modify the original array.

**Note** − If the current array is empty or doesn't contain any initialValue, this method will throw a '```TypeError```' exception.

```javascript
reduce(callbackFn(accumulator, currentValue, currentIndex, array), initialValue)
//accumulator,currentValue and initialValue are compulsory.
//currentValue, currentIndex are optional.

```
#### Example: 
```javascript
const numbers = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];
const sum = numbers.reduce((accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator + currentValue, 0);
console.log(sum);   //150
```

## 2. String Methods
### 2.1 ```toLowerCase()``` and ```to UpperCase()```
The JavaScript String ```toLowerCase()``` method converts all the characters in a string to lowercase letters. It does not change the original string, but **returns a new string.**

The JavaScript String ```toUpperCase()``` method converts all the characters in a string to uppercase letters. It does not change the original string, but **returns a new string.**

#### Example
```javascript
const str = "You are a PROgrammer!";
console.log(str.toLowerCase()) // you are a programmer
console.log(str.toUpperCase()) // YOU ARE A PROGRAMMER
```

### 2.2 ```substr()```

The JavaScript String ```substr()``` method is used to extract a portion (a part of the string) of a string starting at a specified index and extending for a given number of characters.

Here are some additional points about the substr() method as follows −

1. **If the start index value is greater than the string length, an empty string will be returned.**
2. **If the start index value is less than zero (or negative), it starts counting from the end of the string.**
3. **If the start index parameter is omitted or undefined, it's treated as 0.**
4. **If the length parameter value is less than zero (or negative), an empty string is returned.**

***Syntax***: ```substr(start, length)``` 

```javascript
//Example 1
const str = "Methods are Interesting";
console.log(str.substr(2)); //thods are Interesting

console.log(str.substr(0,7)); //Methods
```

### 2.3 ```charAt()```
The JavaScript String ```charAt()``` method returns a new string with a single character from the original string at a given index. An index is the position of a character in a string, starting from 0 for the first character and ending with n-1 for the last character, where n is the length of the string.

Note − This method **returns an empty string** if the given index value is **outside the range of 0 to str.length-1.** It also treats a white-space as a valid character and includes it in the output.

#### Example
```javascript
const str = "Learn Javascript with me!";
console.log(str.charAt(6)); // J 
```

### 2.4 ```indexOf()```
The JavaScript String ```indexOf()```method is used to find the index of the first occurrence of the specified substring in the original string. It ***returns the position of the substring, or -1 if the substring is not present.***

This method accepts an ***optional*** parameter named position, which specifies the position in the original string from where the method starts searching for the specified substring. The default value of this parameter is 0.

*Syntax* : ```indexOf(searchString, position)```

```javascript
const str = "Learn Javascript with me!";
console.log(str.indexof("Java")); //6

console.log(str.indexof("Java",2)); //6 but search starts from index 2
```

For more Methods, Read Part 2.